big_compute.md, before:

## Big Compute
<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/not-a-hot-dog/parallelized-disease-modeling/gh-pages/_images/odyssey_branding.png"/>
</p>

### Description of Parallel Application
OpenMP was used to parallelize computations in our model.
Loop level parallelization was done to optimize performance.
Explicit memory sharing was used for parameter matrices, as well as loop collapsing.
We compared execution using a single node on the Odyssey cluster against an AWS t2.2xlarge instance.
Odyssey was ultimately used for its superior performance.
We found sufficient speedup using one node that multiple were unnecessary.

### Instructions for running on Odyssey

#### Required Directory Structure
In order to run on the cluster, the required directory structure is shown below:

```
generate_data.py
generate_plot.py
data/
|  matrix.npy
project_runs/
|  run.py
|  sir_data_omp.c
|  template.sh
|  timing.c
|  timing.h
results/
```

`matrix.npy` contains granular county-level data. Download instructions are provided below. `generate_data.py` creates the required data CSVs from `matrix.py` and stores them in `data/`. `generate_plot.py` reads in the simulation output from `results/output` and plots them in `results/output.png`. `run.py` handles compilation and setting appropriate environment variables for number of cores. Slurm job parameters such as number of nodes, cores, runtime, and partition are updated in the `__main__` section of `run.py`, as well as number of timesteps to simulate for. The rest of the files are the actual models.

#### Required Dependencies
The compiler `gcc/8.2.0-fasrc1` is used. `OpenMP` comes prebuilt with the compiler. `Python 3.7.7` is used. Runs are executed on the default Odyssey operating system at the time of submission: `CentOS Linux release 7.6.1810 (Core)`.

#### Running the simulation tools
1. Use this [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-iOfdYB9nqvazSthgwOlMHEa5q0RyXbn/view?fbclid=IwAR3xFKPT26JkwBLH0oB7WesWrTytM7ir1t9cjrPa3njt8zsip6nxq4BdmaU) and download `matrix.npy` into the `data/` subdirectory.
2. Run `python generate_data.py` (might take ~1 min) to create the required data CSVs that will be placed in the `data/` subdirectory.
3. Run `python run.py` from `project_runs/`.
4. Run `python generate_plot.py` from the main directory to create a visualization of the simulation result as `results/output.png`.

### Instructions for running on AWS

#### Required Directory Structure
In order to run on AWS, the required directory structure is shown below:

```
generate_data.py
generate_plot.py
data/
|  matrix.npy
models/
|  sir_data_omp.c
|  sir_data.c
|  timing.c
|  timing.h
results/
```

`matrix.npy` contains granular county-level data. Download instructions are provided below. `generate_data.py` creates the required data CSVs from `matrix.py` and stores them in `data/`. `generate_plot.py` reads in the simulation output from `results/output` and plots them in `results/output.png` .The rest of the files are the actual models.

#### Required Dependencies
We recommend running on an AWS t2.2xlarge instance with Ubuntu 16.04. `Python 3.7.7` was used, with `numpy` and `matplotlib`. The `gcc 5.5.0` compiler was used, with OpenMP support needed to run the OpenMP version below.

#### Running the simulation tools

##### OpenMP version (Recommended, requires OpenMP and data download)
1. Use this [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-iOfdYB9nqvazSthgwOlMHEa5q0RyXbn/view?fbclid=IwAR3xFKPT26JkwBLH0oB7WesWrTytM7ir1t9cjrPa3njt8zsip6nxq4BdmaU) and download `matrix.npy` into the `data/` subdirectory.
2. Run `python3 generate_data.py` (might take ~1 min) to create the required data CSVs that will be placed in the `data/` subdirectory.
3. In `models/`, run `gcc -fopenmp sir_data_omp.c -o sir_data_omp` to compile the simulation code (note that this requires OpenMP; for non-OpenMP versions of the code, see below). Execute with `./sir_data_omp 10 ../results/output` to run the simulation for 10 timesteps and save the output.
4. Run `python3 generate_plot.py` from the main directory to create a visualization of the simulation result as `results/output.png`.

##### Non-OpenMP version (Requires data download)
1. Use this [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-iOfdYB9nqvazSthgwOlMHEa5q0RyXbn/view?fbclid=IwAR3xFKPT26JkwBLH0oB7WesWrTytM7ir1t9cjrPa3njt8zsip6nxq4BdmaU) and download `matrix.npy` into the `data/` subdirectory.
2. Run `python3 generate_data.py` (might take ~1 min) to create the required data CSVs that will be placed in the `data/` subdirectory.
3. In `models/`, run `gcc -DUSE_CLOCK sir_data.c timing.c -o sir_data` to compile the simulation code. Execute with `./sir_data 10 ../results/output` to run the simulation for 10 timesteps and save the output.
4. Run `python3 generate_plot.py` from the main directory to create a visualization of the simulation result as `results/output.png`.

### Performance Evaluation
We see a fantastic level of parallelization as number of cores increases using strong scaling.
No significant deviation from perfect speedup appears until approximately 15 cores are used.
Note, despite AWS speedup being comparable, AWS was approximately 50% slower for each calculation.
<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/not-a-hot-dog/parallelized-disease-modeling/gh-pages/_images/cluster_speedup.png" alt>
<em>Image generated from our 1792 x 2944 county matrix.</em>
</p>

The main overheads here is distribution between threads.
On Odyssey, the  overhead of using OpenMP was negligible (and even tended to be faster than single thread calculations without).
We see clearly, however, that this overhead is relatively insigificant when compared to the calculations being performed, as evidenced by the near perfect scaling until 15 cores.

Commit message:

Added how to generate speedup

big_compute.md, after:

## Big Compute
<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/not-a-hot-dog/parallelized-disease-modeling/gh-pages/_images/odyssey_branding.png"/>
</p>

### Description of Parallel Application
OpenMP was used to parallelize computations in our model.
Loop level parallelization was done to optimize performance.
Explicit memory sharing was used for parameter matrices, as well as loop collapsing.
We compared execution using a single node on the Odyssey cluster against an AWS t2.2xlarge instance.
Odyssey was ultimately used for its superior performance.
We found sufficient speedup using one node that multiple were unnecessary.

### Instructions for running on Odyssey

#### Required Directory Structure
In order to run on the cluster, the required directory structure is shown below:

```
generate_data.py
generate_plot.py
data/
|  matrix.npy
project_runs/
|  run.py
|  sir_data_omp.c
|  template.sh
|  timing.c
|  timing.h
results/
```

`matrix.npy` contains granular county-level data. Download instructions are provided below. `generate_data.py` creates the required data CSVs from `matrix.py` and stores them in `data/`. `generate_plot.py` reads in the simulation output from `results/output` and plots them in `results/output.png`. `run.py` handles compilation and setting appropriate environment variables for number of cores. Slurm job parameters such as number of nodes, cores, runtime, and partition are updated in the `__main__` section of `run.py`, as well as number of timesteps to simulate for. The rest of the files are the actual models.

#### Required Dependencies
The compiler `gcc/8.2.0-fasrc1` is used. `OpenMP` comes prebuilt with the compiler. `Python 3.7.7` is used. Runs are executed on the default Odyssey operating system at the time of submission: `CentOS Linux release 7.6.1810 (Core)`.

#### Running the simulation tools
1. Use this [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-iOfdYB9nqvazSthgwOlMHEa5q0RyXbn/view?fbclid=IwAR3xFKPT26JkwBLH0oB7WesWrTytM7ir1t9cjrPa3njt8zsip6nxq4BdmaU) and download `matrix.npy` into the `data/` subdirectory.
2. Run `python generate_data.py` (might take ~1 min) to create the required data CSVs that will be placed in the `data/` subdirectory.
3. Run `python run.py` from `project_runs/`.
4. Run `python generate_plot.py` from the main directory to create a visualization of the simulation result as `results/output.png`.

### Instructions for running on AWS

#### Required Directory Structure
In order to run on AWS, the required directory structure is shown below:

```
generate_data.py
generate_plot.py
data/
|  matrix.npy
models/
|  sir_data_omp.c
|  sir_data.c
|  timing.c
|  timing.h
|  speedup.py
results/
```

`matrix.npy` contains granular county-level data. Download instructions are provided below. `generate_data.py` creates the required data CSVs from `matrix.py` and stores them in `data/`. `generate_plot.py` reads in the simulation output from `results/output` and plots them in `results/output.png` .The rest of the files are the actual models.

#### Required Dependencies
We recommend running on an AWS t2.2xlarge instance with Ubuntu 16.04. `Python 3.7.7` was used, with `numpy` and `matplotlib`. The `gcc 5.5.0` compiler was used, with OpenMP support needed to run the OpenMP version below.

#### Running the simulation tools

##### OpenMP version (Recommended, requires OpenMP and data download)
1. Use this [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-iOfdYB9nqvazSthgwOlMHEa5q0RyXbn/view?fbclid=IwAR3xFKPT26JkwBLH0oB7WesWrTytM7ir1t9cjrPa3njt8zsip6nxq4BdmaU) and download `matrix.npy` into the `data/` subdirectory.
2. Run `python3 generate_data.py` (might take ~1 min) to create the required data CSVs that will be placed in the `data/` subdirectory.
3. In `models/`, run `gcc -fopenmp sir_data_omp.c -o sir_data_omp` to compile the simulation code (note that this requires OpenMP; for non-OpenMP versions of the code, see below). Execute with `./sir_data_omp 10 ../results/output` to run the simulation for 10 timesteps and save the output.
4. Run `python3 generate_plot.py` from the main directory to create a visualization of the simulation result as `results/output.png`.

##### Non-OpenMP version (Requires data download)
1. Use this [link](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-iOfdYB9nqvazSthgwOlMHEa5q0RyXbn/view?fbclid=IwAR3xFKPT26JkwBLH0oB7WesWrTytM7ir1t9cjrPa3njt8zsip6nxq4BdmaU) and download `matrix.npy` into the `data/` subdirectory.
2. Run `python3 generate_data.py` (might take ~1 min) to create the required data CSVs that will be placed in the `data/` subdirectory.
3. In `models/`, run `gcc -DUSE_CLOCK sir_data.c timing.c -o sir_data` to compile the simulation code. Execute with `./sir_data 10 ../results/output` to run the simulation for 10 timesteps and save the output.
4. Run `python3 generate_plot.py` from the main directory to create a visualization of the simulation result as `results/output.png`.

### Performance Evaluation
To run performance evaluation and generate the speedup plot, it is recommended to significantly increase the number of steps (to about 1000) in order to see true speedup:
1. Change `SPEEDUP` to `True` in `run.py`.
2. After runs are completed, `python plot_speedup.py`
The number of cores and partition can be modifies in `run.py` to generate more or less data for each run.
We see a fantastic level of parallelization as number of cores increases using strong scaling.
No significant deviation from perfect speedup appears until approximately 15 cores are used.
Note, despite AWS speedup being comparable, AWS was approximately 50% slower for each calculation.
<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/not-a-hot-dog/parallelized-disease-modeling/gh-pages/_images/cluster_speedup.png" alt>
<em>Image generated from our 1792 x 2944 county matrix.</em>
</p>

The main overheads here is distribution between threads.
On Odyssey, the  overhead of using OpenMP was negligible (and even tended to be faster than single thread calculations without).
We see clearly, however, that this overhead is relatively insigificant when compared to the calculations being performed, as evidenced by the near perfect scaling until 15 cores.
